Examples of questions for the oral exam.

What is a directed multigraph?
What is a graph homomorphism?
What is a reflexive graph?
What is a homomorphism of reflexive graphs?
What is a category?
Give some examples of categories.
What is a preorder category?
What is a monoid?
Give some examples of monoids.
How can a monoid be seen as a category?
What is a monoid homomorphism?
What is the free monoid generated by a set?
What does freeness mean here?
Give a universal property for the list monoid over a set.
What is a functor?
Give some examples of functors, both in mathematics and in computer science.
Give an example of two categories and a graph homomorphism of the underlying graphs that is not a functor.
Explain the notion of isomorphy for (reflexive) graphs, monoids, categories.
What is the product category of two categories?
What is the opposite of a category?
Is the opposite category always/sometimes/never isomorphic to the category itself?
What is a path category?
What is a diagram?
What does it mean for a diagram to commute (= be commutative)?

What is a natural transformation? 
Give some examples of natural transformations, both in mathematics and in computer science.
What is the metagraph MG and how do we get (small) graphs and graph homomorphisms from MG.
How does one interpret a graph in a category?
What is an interpretation category?
What is a functor category?
What is indexing?
What is an arrow category?
What is typing (of sets and of catergories).
Give some examples of indexing and typing, both in mathematics and in computer science.
What is a slice category? What is change of base?
What is a natural isomorphism?
What is an equivalence of categories?
What is the difference between isomorphy and equivalence of two categories?
Compare indexing and typing in the category of sets (difficult!).

Give three ways to define an equivalence relation on a set.
Explain why these three ways are logically equivalent.
Give an example of an equivalence relation and the three ways to define it.
Formulate a universal property for A/E with E an equivalence relation on set A.
What is a monomorphism?
Show that monomorphisms in Set are precisely the injections.
What are the monomorphisms in Rel?
What is an epimorphism?
Show that epimorphisms in Set are precisely the surjections.
What is a subset classifier in Set? (Think of the characteristic function.)
What is a subgraph classifier in Graph (difficult)?
What are the epimorphisms in Graph?
What is an initial object?
Give some examples of categories with initial objects.
What is an final (= terminal) object?
Give some examples of categories with final objects.
Give an example of a finite category with no initial nor final objects.
Explain what dualisation is.
Define product and sum (coproduct) by giving their universal properties.
What are product and sum in Set and Graph?
What are product and sum in preorder categories (if they exist)?
What does it mean to be unique up to unique isomorphism?
Explain uniqueness up to unique isomorphism for final object and sum.
Do we have uniqueness up to unique isomorphism for initial object and product?
Define pullbacks and pushouts.
Define kernel and graph of a morphism f: A->B in Set.
Characterize monomorphisms, kernels and graphs by pullback.
What is the advantage of defining kernel and graph by pullback?
Define the preimage of a morphism f: A->B in Set, given a subset A' of A.
Explain how the preimage can be obtained as a pullback (using "uniqueness up to unique isomorphism").
Explain how pullback (pushout) generalizes product (sum) using final (initial) object.
What is an equalizer? What is the equalizer in Set?
Define pullback from product and equalizer.
Show that the morphism of an equalizer is a mono.
Explain that pullbacks reflect monos.
What is a limit? Give examples of limits.
What is a co-limit? Give examples of co-limits.
Dualize the equalizer to obtain the co-equalizer.
What is the co-equalizer in Set (difficult)?
Explain how the pushouts is the dual of the pullback.
What is a finite limit?
Explain how all finite limits can be obtained by product, final object and equalizer.

What is a monad in category theory (structure + properties)?
What is the power set monad?
Define the (Kleisli) composition of f: A->T(B) and g: B->T(C).
What is a monad in computer science (structure + properties)?
What is the purpose of using monads in programming?
What is the list monad?
Explain the monad for updating a monoid value (called Writer in Haskell).
Give the definition of the Maybe monad (structure + properties).
Give the definition of the State monad (structure + properties).













